Portrait of the Duke of Wellington
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 Jump
to navigationJump to search
 Portrait of the Duke of Wellington
 Francisco Goya
- Portrait of the Duke of Wellington.jpg
 Artist	Francisco Goya
 Year	1812–14
Medium	Oil on mahogany panel
 Dimensions	64.3 cm × 52.4 cm (25.3 in × 20.6 in)
Location	National Gallery, London
 The Portrait of the Duke of Wellington is a
painting by the Spanish artist Francisco Goya of the British general Arthur
Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington during the latter's service in the Peninsular
War.[1] One of three portraits Goya painted of Wellington, it was begun in
August 1812, after the subject's entry into Madrid, showing him as an earl in
red uniform and wearing the Peninsular Medal. The artist then modified it in
1814 to show him in full dress black uniform with gold braid and to add the
Order of the Golden Fleece and Military Gold Cross with three clasps (both of
which Wellington had been awarded in the interim).[2]


 Contents
1	Description
 2	Reception and theft
 3	See also
 4	References
 Description
 The
painting was probably made from life, at sittings in Madrid, painted in oils on
a mahogany panel. Although a successful general, the Wellington depicted by Goya
is tired from the long campaigning, having won a victory at the Battle of
Salamanca on 22 July 1812 before triumphantly entering Madrid on 12 August 1812.
The half-length portrait shows the subject in a three-quarter profile, facing to
the right, with his head turned slightly to the left, towards the viewer. He is
standing upright, with his head held high, perhaps to combat his relatively
modest stature.

 The face is carefully painted, but much of the painting was
done quickly, with great energy, with the military orders outlined with a few
brushstrokes. In some areas, such as the eyes and mouth, the brown priming
remains visible to create a stronger contrast between light and dark areas of
paint.

 His uniform bears the insignia of several military orders. His left
breast bears three stars: the British Order of the Bath (top, awarded in 1804),
the Portuguese Order of the Tower and Sword (lower left, awarded in 1811) and
the Spanish Order of San Fernando (lower right, awarded in 1812). He wears two
broad sashes over his right shoulder: the pink sash of the Order of Bath over
the blue sash of the Order of the Tower and Sword . Around his neck hangs the
Order of the Golden Fleece (awarded in August 1812) on a red ribbon, the
Military Gold Cross lying lower on longer pink and blue ribbons. Wellington was
entitled to all nine gold clasps to the Military Gold Cross, but only three are
shown, perhaps signifying the battles fought before the painting was started in
the summer of 1812.

 In 1812, Goya also completed a chalk drawing of
Wellington, now held by the British Museum, and a large oil-on-canvas Equestrian
portrait of the Duke of Wellington  [pl], which was exhibited at the Real
Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando in Madrid in September 1812 and is now
at Apsley House. X-ray analysis in the 1960 showed that the equestrian portrait
has the head of Wellington added to a body painted previously, perhaps Manuel
Godoy or Joseph Bonaparte.

 Reception and theft
 The painting was acquired by
the Duke of Wellington, and came into the possession of Louisa Catherine Caton,
wife of Francis D'Arcy-Osborne, 7th Duke of Leeds and sister-in-law of
Wellington's older brother Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley. Her first
husband Felton Hervey-Bathurst fought with Wellington in the Iberian Peninsula,
commanding the 14th Light Dragoons from 1811 to 1814, and then on Wellington's
staff in the Waterloo Campaign and Wellingtons representative at the signing of
the Convention of St. Cloud on 3 July 1815.

 It descended to John Osborne,
11th Duke of Leeds by the time it was put up for auction at Sotheby's in 1961.
The New York collector Charles Wrightsman bid £140,000, but the Wolfson
Foundation offered £100,000 and the government added a special Treasury grant of
£40,000, matching Wrightsman's bid and obtaining the painting for the National
Gallery in London, where it was first put on display on 2 August 1961. It was
stolen nineteen days later, on 21 August 1961. It was later returned and Kempton
Bunton confessed to taking the painting and its frame in July 1965.[3] Following
a high-profile trial in which he was defended by Jeremy Hutchinson, QC, Bunton
was found not guilty of stealing the painting, but guilty of stealing the
frame.[4]

 The theft entered popular culture, as it was referenced in the 1962
James Bond film Dr. No. In the film, the painting was on display in Dr. Julius
No's lair, suggesting the first Bond villain had stolen the work.[3][5]


Framed painting



 Goya's chalk drawing, 1812, British Museum



Goya's Equestrian Portrait of the 1st Duke of Wellington, 1812, Apsley House
